>>Brian Dunning: Everything you need to know
about me is on the screen already. So there's
nothing left to say.
[laughter]
I'm Brian Dunning. I do the podcast "Skeptoid."
It's been one of the top science podcasts
in iTunes for, since the beginning of 2007.
In one night, it went from the last pages
to the front page. And it went from 13,000
listeners to 40,000 listeners overnight, just
as soon as it went on the front page of the
science section.
And I guess now, it's up to about 135,000
per week. And that's the way I count. That's
unique IP addresses downloading one or more
episodes, and everyone counts them differently.
What was that funny noise?
>>Male Audience Member #1: It's a dog.
>>Brian Dunning: It's a dog.
[laughter]
[dog yelps]
[Brian laughs]
I think it's a dog. Well, the show is called
"Sounds From Beyond." So that was a sound
from beyond the room.
[laughter]
No, no. The dog's fun. Leave the dog alone.
In fact, bring him out. Maybe he'll do some
tricks for us. That's always more fun than
PowerPoint. OK. Anyway. So, my show. We're
doing a talk. "Skeptoid" is about pop culture
phenomena-- things that people generally believe
that either aren’t true, or that there's
a more interesting truth behind them.
Fact is often more interesting than fiction.
And when you look at anything, any of these
urban legends, things in pop culture that
are promoted on television or whatever, and
you dig into the facts, you almost always
find something that's more interesting, more
engaging, than the popular paranormal, or
pop explanation-- whatever it might be.
So every show, I deal with one particular
subject. The shows are short. They're 10 to
12 minutes long. So it's an easy little sound
bite to grab. And a lot of them are about
sounds, obviously, since it's an audio podcast.
And so I've collected a lot of these examples
and put them into this presentation, "Sounds
From Beyond." And if I had a little echo button,
I'd push it and sound really cool.
[laughter]
So let's get started. Sounds from beyond.
[high-pitched music]
There's my sounds from beyond. That's really
loud. Whoops. This is a beta test.
[computerized sounds]
Pay no attention. I first got interested in
this when I was in high school. I lived in
Orinda, just across the Bay over here. And
we lived in a house that was built on landfill.
There was this big ditch that had a creek
in it.
And at the bottom of the creek, they'd bulldozed
in a whole bunch of dirt and debris. And they
built a couple of houses on it. And these
houses were really cheaply built. And the
land was always shifting. We had slides. And
so, the houses were always creaking and everything
was not quite straight. And my bedroom was
way up in the corner of the room, of the house.
My head was four feet away from this one layer
of thin plywood ceiling that was the whole
roof of the house. There was no insulation
or anything. And right where I slept, my head
was in the absolute corner, there was a weird
creaking that would sound inside the wall.
Sometimes it would sound like a mechanical
creak, like wood or metal or something, or
a hinge.
Sometimes it would sound exactly like a cat
or a baby, or some kind of animal. This weird
reeh. And it would repeat itself at even intervals
all night long. And all day long, sometimes
during the day. And I could never figure out
what it was. And it always creeped me out.
I was a teenager and at night, it would be
quite scary for me sometimes.
So one summer day, I vowed that I was going
to figure out what the hell this sound was.
Can I say hell? Sorry.
[audience chatter]
Does that offend anyone?
[laughter]
>>Male Audience Member #2: After Dan Savage
yesterday?
>>Brian Dunning: OK.
[laughter]
Will do. OK. Where was I? Did I start? I planned
this big assault to find out what the sound
was. I got a ladder. I climbed up onto the
roof of the house. I inspected the whole sides
of the house where there's these little metal,
hingy flaps for the air conditioning, I guess.
Anything that could possibly move or bend
or creak, I was pushing and pulling and prodding,
under the house everywhere. And I couldn't
find any cause of the mysterious sound in
the wall. And to this day, it's an unsolved
mystery for me. But it's something that kind
of stuck with me. And it got me interested
in trying to solve mysteries.
And mine is not the only one. There's plenty
of sounds in the walls in nature. This is
one that if you pay attention to CNN or newspapers
at all, you may have heard this. It's called
"the bloop." You can use Google. It's a nice
website.
[laughter]
And you can google the bloop. Can I say google
as if it's a verb, or is that like verboten
here?
[laughter]
Will the lawyers come in and beat me? So you
can google for the bloop. And what you'll
always find is this article that uses much
of the same languages. The exact same sentences
copied and pasted between various news articles
and blogs.
And they say that "scientists have determined
that it must be an unknown animal; some kind
of a sea monster." Here's what it sounds like.
[plays audio clip]
[rushing wind]
[quick tapping]
[end clip]
What you're looking at here, obviously, is
a spectrogram, for those who don't know. You
have time along the X-axis. And the Y-axis
is frequency. And so, you're hearing the big
bloop. That second stroke is just kind of
a burst of static. I'll play it one more time.
[plays audio clip]
[rushing wind]
[quick tapping]
So it's that bloop sound. This was recorded
in the South Pacific Ocean in 1997. It was
extremely loud. It was heard thousands of
miles in different directions. It was recorded
on a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration--
not sonogram-- what do you call them? Sono--?
>>Male Audience Member #3: Sonar.
>>Brian Dunning: Sonar. Under the water. The
sonar arrays. The things sitting on the bottom
that were supposed to listen for undersea
earthquakes and movement along the Pacific
plate. And it's unsolved. NOAA has no explanation
for what this sound is. It's sped up 16 times.
So when you actually heard it, it was subsonic.
You would have had to listen to the--.
You'd have to look at the spectrogram to tell
that there was any sound there. And when they
played it back sped up, that's what it sounded
like. So, this is widely promoted as evidence
of a sea monster, because they say, "Well,
its sounds, it has the same audio profile,
looking at the spectrogram, as living creatures,
like whales."
Well, it doesn't. I did a whole episode on
it. If you wanna look up the bloop on Skeptoid.com,
right there, you'll see a whole bunch of other
comparative sounds, actual whales and sounds
that actually do come from the sea-- volcanoes,
earthquakes, anything you can think of that
it might be. And you can see it doesn't look
remotely like them.
This is another sound, in fact, that's unsolved,
that I think sounds a lot scarier. I'll play
this one.
[plays audio clip]
[rushing wind]
[wind slows down]
[end clip]
It actually sounds a lot more like a whale,
but it doesn't look anything like a whale.
And that one is called "Julia." They just
gave it a name. And it's officially classified
as unsolved. There are no scientists who have
decided that these must be sea monsters.
That's strictly the ornamentation added to
the story by a reporter. Here's one that has
a really cool sound.
[plays audio clip]
A really cool name.
[rushing wind]
[train whistle]
[end clip]
It's called "the train." Sounds like a train
whistle, doesn't it? Usually when I do this,
it's roughly synchronized with the train whistle.
But [pause] not only do you hear the high
frequency sound, but you see those low frequency
bands, also.
Those are also part of the sound. And they're
also unexplained. This one is called "the
slowdown."
[plays audio clip]
[rushing wind]
[wind slows down]
What do you think that might be? Obviously
the thing that comes to mind is an engine
slowing down-- a submarine, or a ship, or
something like that. It's not. Those sound
very different. They look very different on
a spectrogram. So, this is also officially
unsolved. Here's one called "the upsweep."
[plays audio clip]
[fast wind speeding up in intervals]
These are all sped up 16 times. These are
all subsonic.
[audio clip continues]
Sounds like a police siren or something. Nobody
has any idea what this could be. There's a
whole giant library of these at NOAA.
[audio clip ends]
They're really quite cool. If you--whoops.
So here's another sound in the wall, if you
were, that's from a completely different part
of the world. And I wanna see if you can guess
what this might be. And if you've already
seen this presentation, don't shout it out,
you.
[plays audio clip]
[deep wind rushing]
Call out any guesses you have.
>>Male Audience Member #4: Jet engine.
>>Male Audience Member #5: Bees.
>>Brian Dunning: Not bees, not a jet engine.
>>Male Audience Member #6: Fan.
>>Male Audience Member #7: Didgeridoo.
>>Brian Dunning: Fan? No, not a fan. It's
not mechanical.
>>Male Audience Member #7: Didgeridoo.
>>Brian Dunning: Not a didgeridoo. I guess
that would be mechanical. Here is a hint.
[audio clip ends]
[audio clip begins]
[seagull-like sounds]
I apologize for the guy wearing Speedos. It
is sand squeaking. [audio clip ends] This
is the [plays previous audio clip of deep
wind rushing] singing sands. These are the
Eureka Dunes in Death Valley. There's a number
of places in the world where the sand sings,
given the right conditions.
Sand dunes, they're not all dry sand. Part
of the reason that they stay in pretty much
the same place year after year is that 18
to 24 inches below the surface, they become
almost solid. Either there's wet sand or it's
hardened rock or dirt. And given the right
temperature and humidity and wind, [audio
clip ends] the sand will actually make that
noise.
And you can actually hear it. That's an audible
recording. It's not sped up. The volume is
about what it would sound like if you were
there in person. And although this is partly
understood, it's not completely understood
how and why this happens. So, that's just
a really interesting area of research. The
complexities involved in what's causing that
sound are really something pretty cool.
And there's other sounds that don't turn out
to be scary when we learn what they are. This
is one. You can guess from the picture that
this is a pulsar. This one is going one point
four times a second.
[plays audio clip]
[mechanical tapping sound]
Now, when we first heard this, we thought
that it had to be an intelligent signal because
it sounds so regular and so perfect. And it's
absolutely right on. It never changes. So
this was called the LGM signal for a long
time-- Little Green Men.
We thought it was aliens until we learned
what pulsars were. Pulsars, as you may know,
when a star goes supernova, it collapses.
And all of that rotational inertia is preserved.
And as it collapses down into a neutron star,
it's spinning. So all the spin that the sun
had is greatly accelerated like a figure skater
bringing in her arms.
And so it's spinning quite fast. And it shoots
out this jet of x-rays and gamma rays, which
is also not completely understood how or why
they shoot out these jets. But each time that
jet spins by us, and if we're on the same
plane, we hear a click like that. And that's
not the only pulsar that there are. There's
others that spin faster. This is one in the
VELA.
[plays audio clip]
[fast pulsing sound]
That's awful loud.
[end clip]
That was going eleven times a second. And
this one exploded ten thousand years ago.
So, people probably saw it. Here's one that
people definitely saw. This happened in 1054
AD. It's going even faster. It's 30 times
a second. And this is the Crab Pulsar in the
center of the Crab Nebula.
[plays audio clip]
[fast pulsing sound]
[end clip]
Now I want you to stop for a second and reflect
on what you're hearing. That is a body in
space, spinning that fast. It's about the
size of Earth and it's spinning that fast.
If you were up next to that thing in a spaceship,
watching something that size, moving that
fast, it really boggles the mind. Or, how
about 174 times a second?
[plays audio clip]
[fast mechanical pulsing sound]
[end clip]
Guaranteed to be the most annoying presentation
here.
[laughter]
Last one I'm gonna play for you is the second
fastest pulsar known. The surface of this
body is moving one-seventh the speed of light
as it rotates.
[plays audio clip]
[high-pitched pulsing tone]
[end clip]
And we all know all of that just by listening
to the sound and analyzing the sound that
we heard. Now, some sounds are not quite as
useful as evidence in solving a mystery. Some
sounds, we don't know where they came from.
We're not sure of their provenance. They're
just presented to us and somebody tells us
a story of where they heard the sound and
where they recorded it. And you might get
a sound like this.
[plays audio clip]
[wind rushing]
[indescribable wailing]
[end clip]
Anyone wanna guess what that's alleged to
be? It's Bigfoot.
[laughter]
Here's another Bigfoot recording.
[plays audio clip]
[monkey sounds]
[end clip]
Now, you wanna--.
>>Male Audience Member #5: That sounds like
a dog.
>>Brian Dunning: What's that?
>>Male Audience Member #5: That sounds like
a dog.
>>Brian Dunning: That sounds like a dog? I
don't know what it sounds like. The reason
we know that it's Bigfoot is because it's
on an album titled, "The Bigfoot Recordings."
[laughter]
And the reason we can rely on that is because
they were analyzed by a "linguist." Quote,
unquote.
[laughter]
The linguist, her professional background
is that she plays the flute and she speaks
several languages. Therefore, it's Bigfoot.
[laughter]
And, if that's not enough science credibility
for you, the recording is narrated by Jonathan
Frakes, from "Star Trek: The Next Generation."
[plays audio clip]
[bird chirp sound]
[low growl sound]
[end clip]
It can only be Bigfoot.
[plays audio clip]
[owl hooting sound]
[end clip]
So, I'll say just a little bit about why I'd
say that these sounds are useless as evidence.
Why we can't just listen to that and say,
"Well, somebody says they recorded it at such
and such a place, and at such and such a time,
and they don't know what it is and the linguist
says that it's Bigfoot, so therefore, it's
Bigfoot."
Why do we dismiss that? You've probably all
heard the statement that that which can be
asserted without evidence can be dismissed
without evidence. It's not necessarily as
glib as that. When something has no provenance,
when something is an anecdote like that, we
can't test it. We can't verify it.
And it's as simple as that, really. We're
not simply dismissing it. We have good reason
because we cannot test it. We don't know,
we don't actually know where it was recorded,
when it was recorded, under what circumstances,
where the tape has been all these years. It's
interesting. And if somebody tells us, "I
recorded Bigfoot at this place and at this
time," that can suggest directions for us
to go research.
We can then send a real team to go and listen
and see if anything’s going on and document
it properly. But as far as evidence, itself,
it doesn't qualify yet. Anecdotal evidence.
So, some sounds, however, do have a very useful
provenance that does allow us to solve the
mystery. If you watch any of the pseudo-History
channels, or the pseudo-Science channels on
TV, you may have seen UFO shows.
In fact, I bet you have. One of the UFO stories
you might have been told, is the case of the
Rendlesham Forest UFO. This is one that happened
in the UK at an Air Force base inside the
UK in 1980. What happened was a bunch of young
US airmen saw some flashing lights out through
the trees. They went running out through the
trees to track them down and see what it was.
They initially thought a plane had crashed.
And so, they were following the flashing lights.
And later, their story grew into what's now
told on the TV shows. But at the time, all
they reported was seeing flashing lights and
chasing them down. So they went back to the
base and they got their Colonel--Colonel Halt.
And he came back with an audio recorder. And
he made an officially documented audio recording
of their chase through the trees, following
the blinking light. And here's a few seconds
from that audio recording.
[plays audio clip]
>>Male: I just saw a light right there.
>>Colonel Halt: Where?
>>Male: Right on this position here, straight
ahead, in-between the tree--. There it is
again. Watch. Straight ahead off my flashlight.
There it is.
>>Colonel Halt: I see it, too. What is it?
>>Male: We don't know, sir. It's a strange,
small red light.
[end clip]
>>Brian Dunning: Now you see that is circled
in yellow up in the corner of this picture.
This is actually the view from the forest.
If you went all the way through the forest
where these guys were and came out of the
trees, this is what you would see. That is
the Orford Ness lighthouse.
The constable showed up because the Air Force
base, they called the local constable and
said, "Hey, we think we've got a crashed plane
or some accident or something." They came
out, wrote in their report, "These guys saw
the lighthouse." And they left. And that's
obviously evidence of a government conspiracy
that they left with no further investigation.
So, the Orford Ness lighthouse has a period
of exactly five seconds. Every lighthouse
has a unique period--the time between each
blink. That's how sailors can identify which
lighthouse they're looking at. So, with a
five second beep, overlaid on top of this
recording, this is what it sounds like.
[plays audio clip]
>>Male: I just saw a light right there.
>>Colonel Halt: Where?
[beep]
>>Male: Right on this position here, straight
ahead, in-between tree--.
[beep]
There it is again. Watch. Straight ahead off
my flashlight.
[beep]
There it is.
>>Colonel Halt: I see it, too. What is it?
[end clip]
>>Brain: So, we have a very reliable recording.
[laughter]
That solved the mystery for us very reliably.
That's the value of sounds.
[laughter]
So, sometimes, the sounds are not always clues
that help us solve mysteries. Sometimes, the
sounds are the mysteries themselves. You're
looking at a Royal Air Force base on the island
of Akrotiri in Cyprus.
And short-wave radio enthusiasts have, for
about 20 years, 25 years, they've been hearing
a radio broadcast on a particular frequency,
at the same time of day, every single day.
And this is what it sounds like.
[plays audio clip]
[piano notes]
>>Woman: Three, nine, seven, one, five. Three,
nine, seven, one, five.
[end clip]
>>Brian Dunning: And they triangulated it
to this RAF base. And so the conspiracy theories
started flying. These are called numbers stations.
If you Google the internets, you will find--
[laughter]
all sorts of stories about the numbers stations
and conspiracy theories about what they are.
Sometimes, people suggest plausible explanations,
like there's buoys in the ocean transmitting
weather data and things like this.
But those don't use a voice recording on short-wave.
So it must be governments transmitting evil
instructions to their evil spies. Here's another
one that interestingly comes from inside the
White Sands missile base in the United States--
[plays audio clip]
[movie clip]
[end clip]
followed by the same strings of five numbers
repeating over and over again. And this one
actually rotates frequencies. It plays the
same time of day on the same frequency, every
single day, stepping up a few frequencies
each time.
It turns out in this case, that the conspiracy
theory explanation is the true one. There's
something that happened on 9/11 in the Pentagon
that may have been lost in the news for other
reasons. A woman was arrested in the Pentagon
on 9/11 and thrown in jail for listening to
this numbers station coming out of Cuba.
[plays audio clip]
[woman speaking numbers in Spanish] Atención.
Trés. Ocho. Nueve. Cinco. Nueve. Cero. Quatro.
Quatro. Siete. Tres. Tres. Ocho. Nueve. Cinco.
Nueve.
[end clip]
There was also another group of spies, called
the "Wasp Network of Spies," that were arrested
in 1998 and imprisoned for doing exactly the
same thing. They were listening to this radio
station every day.
They were typing these groups of five numbers
into their laptop computer and a program was
decrypting it and getting their evil instructions
from the evil Cuban government. So, if you
know anything about cryptography, you'll know
that it's common for codes to be expressed
as, as strings of five digits.
And that's exactly what the numbers stations
turned out to be. We have the RAF one on,
on Cyprus. We have the White Sands missile
range called "Yosemite Sam." And there are
dozens of these coming from all over the world.
[pause] But just because some of the sounds
turn out to be conspiracy theories being true,
it doesn't mean that they all are.
I'm sure you've all heard rock music played
backwards and how some people think that there's
messages encoded in that. Nothing new there.
Just as an example, listen to Jim Morrison
singing the phrase, "treasures there' from
"Break On Through."
[plays audio clip]
[Jim Morrison sings]
"treasures there"
[end clip]
And if you play it backwards, he says "I am
Satan."
[plays audio clip]
[Jim Morrison sings]
[end clip]
[laughter]
Notice that I primed you. First I told you
what he was gonna say. And then I played it
for you so that you're guaranteed to have
heard what I wanted you to hear. If you hadn't
been primed, you would've heard him say this.
[plays audio clip]
[Jim Morrison sings]
[end clip]
I am Sataschniegel.
[laughter]
It's much less interesting when it's not carefully
edited and someone is not looking for a specific
string of text. So, there's a subculture of
people who call this "back masking." And their
theory is that our brains work in such a way
that it deliberately chooses words, which
when played backwards, will say what we actually
mean.
[laughter]
Back masking. Here's another example of that.
Here's a guy giving some little talk.
[plays audio clip]
>>Man: More energy and money and effort.
[end clip]
And what he really means is "you're frightened,
lean on me."
[plays audio clip]
[man speaks backwards]
[end clip]
And again, without the careful editing.
[plays audio clip]
[man speaks backwards]
[end clip]
Lean on me zurnielm. And if back masking is
true, then Jim Morrison actually, his purpose
in life is to convince us that he is Sataschneigel.
[laughter]
[pause]
These sounds don't have to be played backwards.
Sometimes they can be played just forward,
just naturally. And they say something that
was not intended. Listen to this toy.
[plays audio clip]
[baby giggles and coos]
[end clip]
What was that? Islam is the light? Oh my God,
how horrific.
[laughter]
Let's hear that again.
[plays audio clip]
[baby giggles and coos]
[end clip]
Islam is the light. Well, there was so much
outrage over this toy saying that Islam is
the light that Fisher Price actually had to
pull this doll off the market and re-release
it with a different sound of baby giggling.
So, here's a sound that I recorded myself.
You probably all know Mount Diablo across
the Bay. And on the back side is the Black
Diamond Mine. And at the Black Diamond Mine,
there's a cemetery that's been there for I'm
not sure how long--a hundred years or so.
A lot of the graves are very old. And I actually
recorded this myself in 2003. Listen to this.
[plays audio clip]
[wind rushing]
[ghostly voice speaking indescribable words]
[end clip]
I'm gonna tell you more about that a little
bit later. But just remember that I played
something that sounded kinda silly. [pause]
A lot of times, these can just be plain fun.
We can learn a little bit of science from
them, but they're also fun.
This is a guy who took recorded voice, an
actual recording of somebody actually speaking,
separated it into six frequencies and played
back the six frequencies, each one separately
resonated as, as a noise. Pink noise? Is that
pink noise or white noise? Someone here has
to know that. You're all smart. They told
me.
[laughter]
Pink? OK. So, I'm gonna tell you again. I'm
gonna prime you what this--. No, I won't.
I won't prime you. I'll make you listen to
it first.
[plays audio clip]
[white noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
OK. That was an actual voice. Someone actually
said that, but what you're hearing is not
processed speech from him. It's a computer
representation, making up a new sound simulating
his speech with these five bands of noise.
Listen to it one more time and see if you
can tell what he says. Lemme turn it up a
bit.
[plays audio clip]
[white noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
Anyone?
>>Male Audience Member #6: Satan says the
truth is in the park.
>>Brian Dunning: Satan says the truth is in
the park. No.
[laughter]
It was a sunny day and the children were going
to the park.
[plays audio clip]
[white noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
You hear it now? Because you've been primed.
You've been told what it says. So you can't
not hear it. Here's another way of doing the
same thing, except the voices were reproduced
using a single sine wave.
So if you were to look at the frequency of
this, you'd just see one little sine wave
going like this. Much simplified. There's
no traditional speech cues in this. There's
no--. There are no constanents, for example.
And yet, you can still understand what it
says to some degree. Here's the same sentence.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
Isn't that cool? You can hear it saying, "It
was a sunny day and the children were going
to the park." Understanding speech without
traditional speech cues. Here's another one.
See if you can tell what this says.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
He was sitting at his desk in his office.
Listen to this.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
>>Male Audience Member #7: Museum something.
>>Brian Dunning: Museum? A lot of people hear
"museum." Let's see if I can go back and play
it again.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
Suddenly it sounds very obvious, doesn't it?
You can't not hear it. Here's one saying,
"The man read the newspaper at lunch time."
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
[laughter]
[pause]
One more.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic noise with word sounds]
[end clip]
>>Male Audience Member #8: The owl was kept
in a cage at the zoo.
>>Brian Dunning: The owl was kept in a cage
at the zoo? Very close. It's "the camel was
kept in a cage at the zoo." It gets easier.
Once you understand this, your brain adapts
fairly quickly. And it suddenly becomes much
easier to understand. But what's important
is note that when I primed you, it was really
obvious to tell what it says.
And I want you to pay attention the next time
you watch a ghost show on television, where
they have an electronic voice phenomenon that
they supposedly recorded that they say must
be a ghost. They will always, always prime
you first with what they want you to think
it says before they play the sound for you.
Notice that. Thanks to Matt Davis at Cambridge
who did, who did this work. So, here's a cool
thing. No question about what it's saying.
I put the text up here on the screen for you
so you can read along. I want you to see if
you can tell what is making this speech.
[plays audio clip]
[piano notes with word sounds]
[end clip]
Shout out some guesses.
>>Male Audience Member #9: Piano?
>>Brian Dunning: Piano. Most people got it.
[plays audio clip]
[piano notes with word sounds]
[woman speaking German]
[end clip]
Isn't that something?
[plays audio clip]
[piano notes with word sounds]
[end clip]
[Brian laughs]
Frequencies are frequencies and sound is sound.
So even though a piano is so different from
how our vocal chords work, we can still understand
what it says. See if you can guess this musical
instrument.
[plays audio clip]
[chainsaw buzzing to the tune of 'My Country
'Tis of Thee']
It's louder than the noise [ ].
This is a Renault V10 Formula One engine from
a few years ago. Obviously being computer-controlled.
I just like that last part.
[end clip]
[laughter]
[pause]
Click. Click. OK. One more mystery guess the
musical instrument.
[plays audio clip]
[electronic sound with Mario Bros. tune]
Or guess the game that it's from. That answer
is acceptable as well.
[music continues]
[audio clip ends]
Sounds kind of sparky, doesn't it? Or, kind
of farty. One or the other.
[audio clip continues]
[laughter]
Tesla coils. Two Tesla coils, so it's polytronic.
[audio clip continues]
[electronic sound with Mario Bros. tune]
[end clip]
In December 2009, I spoke at the Chaos Computer
Conference in Berlin. And I was coming outside.
I was leaving the conference center at like
3AM. It's a 24-hour conference. I go out the
doors. It was December in Berlin, so it was
insanely cold.
I have no idea. And I almost stepped into
one of these. Between, between two notes,
it's, it's silent and there's no flash, so
you don't see anything. And this is like just
during a rest in the music that I happened
to come along and open the door and step out
here. Nearly walked into the thing, just as
it started playing another note.
It was like that far from my face. Scared
the living crap out of me. And I probably
almost died. I don't know.
[laughter]
[plays audio clip]
[Tesla coils playing]
Here's the guy who made one in his bedroom
just for fun.
[end clip]
Yeah, you're cool dude. Make a real YouTube
video.
[laughter]
Think how much better this would be if his
cat had come in while he's doing that.
[laughter]
All right. Sometimes, the sounds solve mysteries,
even when no sound was heard. For example,
when a sound is subsonic. This gentleman right
here is Vic Tandy. He's passed away now. But
he's relatively famous for some work that
he did during the last years of his life.
It started in 1980.
He was working in a lab in a basement in the
UK. And he kept seeing a blob in his peripheral
vision. And he'd turn and there wouldn't be
anything there. He'd start working again.
He'd see the blob and he'd turn. And there
wouldn't be anything there. And he told his
co-workers that and they said, "Oh, yeah.
That lab's haunted."
[laughter]
He goes, "OK." So the next day, he brings
in his fencing foil. He was a fencing enthusiast,
so he brought his foil into the lab. That's
company time theft because I'm sure that's
not what his research was supposed to be.
He puts his foil in a vice and he's about
to unscrew it or do something to it, and the
foil starts doing this. It starts oscillating
all on its own. And he said, "Aha. There must
be some low frequency sound that I can't hear."
And he got a hold of some sound testing equipment.
And he found out that indeed, there was 19
Hertz at a pretty substantial amplitude.
This is his actual tracing of what he recorded
in that lab, starting at five, ten, fifteen,
twenty Hertz. You can see that giant peak
just at about 19 Hertz. He measured the room
and found out that the room was exactly half
the length of a 19 Hertz wavelength, which
is some 30, 33, 30 -something feet, I believe.
And the lab was half of that.
So he thought, "That's interesting." And he
was wondering if maybe that could account
for the anomaly in his vision as well. Well,
that's not quite so far-fetched, because NASA
also did some of these tests for the same
thing. A Saturn V is damn loud. And it might
have some effect on astronaut’s ability
to perform.
And so, NASA, to be responsible, they had
to do some tests and see if--well, I wanna
say people, but they used animals--how that
would affect their vision. They put dogs in
chairs. Strapped them in chairs. They shook
the chairs. They shook the dog’s bodies.
And they shook the dog’s heads and tried
to see the effect on the dog's vision, how
it would be able to track its vision.
They did the same thing with people when the
dogs didn't die. And they found this. Vision
was affected at--. Look at that frequency
where the highest peak is. It's just about
the same place--almost 19 Hertz. And it turns
out that this approximately 19 Hertz -- it's
gonna be a little bit different for everyone,
is the resonant frequency of your eyeball.
And you can test that by if you--.
You know, if you ping a wine glass, the note
that it produces, that's its resonant frequency.
So if you were to do that to your eyeball--.
[laughter]
I'm not gonna try it by way of demonstration,
but that's the sound of the thump that would
make. Nineteen Hertz at subsonic, so you wouldn't
hear it. But that's the resonant frequency
of an eyeball. So, NASA found that your vision
is affected at 19 Hertz. And this guy did
find that he saw a blurb in his peripheral
vision.
So, other people have tried following that
up to see if maybe this explains some cases
of hauntings, because we have infrasound throughout
the world. In Vic Tandy's case, he found it
was caused by a fan--an air conditioning fan
that had been installed. The lab was either
positively pressurized or negatively pressurized
and it was this particular fan that kept the
air pressure where it was supposed to be that
once they shut it off, that frequency dropped
away. So my friend Richard Wiseman, who's
an experimental psychologist in the UK, in
2002, he did an experiment with some others.
They took what you see here. It's basically
some big giant organ pipes. These things make
19 Hertz subsonic frequency.
And they got 1750 people--a fairly large size
sample--in different groups. They put them
into a theater, a music hall, and they played
four pieces of music--the same four pieces
of music for all the people. They randomly--.
They did a random test where some of the groups
got infrasound in the background, along with
the music.
And then they asked everyone if they were
emotionally affected by the music. And they
found a statistically significant 22 percent
of the people were more emotionally affected
when this subsonic inaudible ultrasound, infrasound
was present. So, Tandy spent the rest of his
career basically investigating haunted sites
throughout the UK and seeing if he could find
infrasound and turning it off.
So, that was pretty cool. And the lesson that
we learned from all this is pretty simple:
Doing the work and finding the real answers
is always more interesting than accepting
the popular explanations. Stopping at, "The
lab is haunted. That's all there is to it."
If you actually do the work, you're always
gonna learn something better and you're always
gonna learn something interesting.
So, I told you that I would come back to the
mysterious sound that I recorded in the cemetery.
[plays audio clip]
[wind rushing]
[ghostly voice speaking indescribably words]
Pretty, pretty terrifying. [end clip]
I can see that some of you looked kind of
alarmed. If you need to leave, feel free.
[laughter]
You're probably not gonna be surprised that
when you play it backwards, it sounds like
this.
[plays audio clip]
[wind rushing]
[Brian Dunning talks]
"This is nonsense."
Ha ha ha, isn't that funny? [end clip]
OK. Well that's the end of the talk. We're
gonna do some Q&A if we have time. Do we have
time?
>>Male Presenter: Yeah.
>>Brian Dunning: OK. And while you're thinking
of your very interesting questions--. And
I guess we can also take questions from the
remote sites, yes? And the mysterious raptured
voice from above will read the questions for
us if we have them.
A couple of announcements. One that I told
you I'd forget, which was what?
>>Male Audience Member #10: We're going to
lunch after this?
>>Brian Dunning: We're going to lunch after
this. If anyone wants to join us, that's lots
of fun. We have--. This is allegedly an Authors@Google
talk, right? Not a Podcasters@Google? So I
quickly threw together a book.
[laughter]
Every 50 episodes of the podcast--well, the
best 50 episodes--they go into a book. So,
this is Volume three. Volume four and five
should be coming out later this year. This
one's called, "Pirates, Pyramids, and Papyrus,"
available on Amazon.com.
And basically, this is--. These are all 50
stories that you've heard in pop culture.
Most people will have heard of most of these.
And you get a great explanation on any of
them. If you've got any people in your family
who have strange beliefs, or who believe one
of these stories that they heard on Oprah
or whatever, you can almost certainly find
the answer in this book, or one of its predecessors.
So I recommend it. It's fun and I make money
every time you buy one. So, I recommend it
a second time.
[laughter]
And oh, look. There's my Twitter name on the
screen. [pause]
Or do you guys not like Twitter 'cause it's
not Google?
[laughter]
You don't own that yet, do you?
>>Male Presenter: Not yet.
>>Brian Dunning: No? OK. All right. Q&As.
Any questions about this or any other mysterious
subjects that I may or may not have covered
yet? Blank stares. I was at Pixar yesterday.
Oh, go ahead.
>>Female Audience Member #11: When you have
people talk to you about pseudoscience or
[ ], or just general discussion, what is your
theory on engaging with them, like friends,
loved ones and stuff?
>>Brian Dunning: That's a very common question.
She asked--. I'm repeating the question. That
was the other thing I was going to forget.
[laughter]
She's asking when I'm engaging in conversation
with people and they have some--. How did
you phrase it?
>>Female Audience Member #11: They have some
pseudoscience--.
>>Brian Dunning: They have some pseudoscience
belief. How do I engage them in such a way
without them starting a fight or me starting
a fight and losing them as a friend, co-worker,
colleague, whatever they are?
It's a very common question and it's a very
common problem. And it's a problem because
people do it when they shouldn't. I simply
don't do it. I almost never go up to someone
and say, "Ah, you're wearing the Power Balance
bracelet. That's fake." I don't do that. I
don't go up and I don't criticize people who
are going to church on Sunday.
Whatever it is that they're doing, I have
no problem with it at all, unless they're
on their deathbed dying of cancer and they're
gonna be dead in the next 24 hours unless
they go to a doctor. Then I might say something.
Otherwise, I say don't start an argument.
And if you want to bring someone over to your
way of thinking, don't start by attacking
their cherished, sacred cow.
Start with something where you have common
ground. I know it's self-serving, but I always
say go to, go to Skeptoid and find a podcast
episode on something that you know you're
both going to agree with, because a lot of
them are really interesting. Some of these
old historical cases, they don't challenge
anyone's beliefs, but everyone has fun learning
about them.
And you get people interested in this material
and they want more. And they'll, they'll start
cutting their way in closer and closer to
your way of thinking sooner or later. So,
don't create a problem. Don't, don't put friendships
on the line because you have the opportunity
to not have a fight and to eventually win
them over with honey, not vinegar. Yes, sir.
>>Male Audience Member #12: Well, following
on to that, aside from specific views that
people have in some of this nonsense, there's
this widespread feeling that skepticism and
critical thinking are just kind of moods--
>>Brian Dunning: Yes, yes. He's pointing out
that skepticism and critical thinking has
a negative reputation for being, basically,
an inherently negative process. And that's
absolutely true. I couldn't agree with you
more.
I hate the word 'skeptic' and 'skepticism'.
I wish I hadn't called my podcast "Skeptoid."
I'd call it anything else if I could, because
that doubles my work. First, people hear the
work "skeptic" and they go, "Oh, you're one
of those people that thinks 9/11 was a government
conspiracy."
[laughter]
No. So you have to educate them on what you
consider skepticism to be, which is supposed
to be a positive process of finding more information
and finding the truth. But that's not the
way that it happens.
You've got all these people, like Richard
Dawkins right now, writing these books that
are inflammatory as hell. Can I say hell?
>>Male Presenter: Yes.
[laughter]
It's okay.
>>Brian Dunning: I don't think that's the
way to go about it. I don't think being inherently
negative is positive.
[Brian laughs]
And that's why what I try to do on my show--and
the early shows I was not as successful at
this. But what I try to do now is I try to
only be positive. I don't set out to debunk,
quote unquote, anything, because that's simply
inherently negative.
And that doesn't do anybody any good. Because
there is good science. There is interesting
information behind almost every story. And
if you focus on that, then you've got something
that everyone can enjoy and that everyone
can appreciate. So, you make an, you make
an important point that skepticism is often
negative and harmful and doesn't do anyone
any good.
And I agree with you completely. [pause] Any
questions from the mysterious voice in the
heavens? [pause] Maybe they were all raptured
already.
[laughter]
>>Male Audience Member #13: No, that's tomorrow.
>>Brian Dunning: Well I started to say--.
I started to say that I was at Pixar yesterday
and giving talks in the Bay Area--. Sorry
to offend anyone, but Bay Area is basically
the center of alternative everything and there's
a lot of, shall we say, not quite scientific
beliefs that are very popular up here.
And Pixar – it's supposed to be a room of
all smart people. And someone asked a question
about some news story that had been published.
And I pointed out that news stories, when
they report MIT or Harvard has just published
a study in which this was found or that was
found, what it almost always is, is the university's
PR department sending out a press release
about some 17-year old undergrad who did something
completely flawed and faulty, but it's interesting
news.
And so, they'll send out a press release about
it. It doesn't mean that Harvard did a study,
but it does mean that Harvard did a study
because some student did something. And that's
exactly how the whole bottled water scare
got started. This is what I was saying at
Pixar yesterday. And as soon as I said "bottled
water" I saw the radar going up. People in
the audience were getting pissed off like
this.
What happened at the University of Idaho was
this student had--. He was doing a test on
seeing if bottled water leeched evil toxic
chemicals--. The bottle, if it leeched evil
toxic chemicals into the water and makes you
die from drinking it. And so, what he found
that this particular brand of plastic bottles
leeched DEHA into the water.
And that got into the news. University sent
out a press release as they always do and
that got into the news and it went national.
And it’s been a common belief ever since.
That bottle didn't even have DEHA in it. It
was from the lab equipment he was using--the
plastic tubes that the water flowed between
the bottle and his test equipment.
So, I don't know if he got an F or whatever,
but his study was completely flawed and by
no way would it be accurate to say the University
of Idaho has concluded this or that. So I
start telling the same story at Pixar yesterday
and I could tell that everyone in the room
wanted to fight with me because I just attacked
their sacred cow.
Because evil plastic bottles, that's the beginning
and end of government conspiracy and the evil
corporations out to kill us all with their
toxins.
[laughter]
So I went in to another point that I often
make. And that's that every substance in the
world is both poisonous and safe. There's
no dividing line between what's a poison and
what's not. It's what concentration of it
will kill you. Water will kill you at a concentration.
Air will, oxygen will kill you at a certain
concentration.
One of the most toxic substances known as
Plutonium--how much Plutonium do you think
you have in you right now? The average person
has 20 million atoms of Plutonium in their
body. Why doesn't it kill you? Because it's
a safe level. That's a safe level of Plutonium.
There's a safe level of BPA. There's a safe
level of DEHA.
Plastic water bottles do contain BPA in many
cases, well below safe levels. Nevertheless,
it's a really hard thing for people to accept
that something so deeply ingrained that they've
been told this is poisonous and it's an evil
corporate conspiracy to kill you because the
lawsuits cost less than continuing to use
BPA.
People just do not wanna accept science that,
that contradicts with their preexisting beliefs.
So, [pause] I could tell, I could tell that
when I made this point at Pixar that didn't
sway everyone in the room. But watching the
audience reactions, I could tell a lot of
people were getting pissed off when I mentioned
plastic water bottles and then I could see
them going, "Yeah, OK. I can accept that."
About half of them. The other half chased
me out of the building with pitchforks and
torches shortly thereafter.
[laughter]
Yes, sir.
>>Male Audience Member #14: Why do you think
the, the reporting around food in particular,
and particularly in, with respect to diet--
>>Brian Dunning: Uh-huh.
>>Male Audience Member #14: Why do you think
that pseudoscience is so much more widespread
and respected by people than most other things--
>>Brian Dunning: Basically, why are all the
food pseudosciences and food-related conspiracy
theories so popular? Aspartame, high, high
fructose corn syrup, all of these evil toxic
chemicals. Why McDonalds? People love to bash
fast food.
That's been one of the most popular subjects
in Hollywood for ten years. Why are these,
these pseudosciences, if you will, so popular?
And it's because they're popular. It's because
it's really popular right now. It's just a
social trend. Foodieism, is that a word? Foodieism.
Google that somebody.
[laughter]
That's not funny. Don't laugh at that. That
was an obvious joke. That wasn't a good joke.
Because it's simply popular. And it's a really
easy sell. Almost all of the food-related
pseudosciences are centered on the whole all-natural
fallacy.
If something is all-natural, it's therefore
healthy. If anything has chemicals in it--
[laughter]
[pause] it's immoral and evil. And that's
related to so many, so many other popular
myths. The Big Pharma conspiracy is another
one. Why don't we all use herbs in everything?
All these drugs that the evil Big Pharma companies
are always pushing on us, they're all developed
by humans.
Therefore, they're immoral. But you see, almost
all drugs are developed from natural substances.
That's how we find them to begin with. I have
two friends who are microbiologists at the
Scripps Institute in San Diego.
All they do--their entire careers--they're
going to do nothing but pick through these
little tiny pieces of seaweed in this one
little aquarium that they have in their basement
and they're just gonna test these, test these
compounds they find in the seaweed for some
kind of a compound that's gonna have some
effect, positive as a drug, on some disease.
They're probably gonna work their entire careers.
And they're probably gonna find nothing at
all. It takes that much work for us to finally
find one drug in nature that works. It takes
a lot of time, costs a hell of a lot of money.
Can I say hell? I think we've established
that.
[laughter]
And when we do find one, we find ways that
we can mass produce it because taking one
molecule out of a piece of seaweed is not
very efficient. We have to be able to mass
produce it in volume. It has to be purified.
We have to be able to know what the dose is.
So the whole Big Pharma process, largely,
once you know about it, once you have friends
who are microbiologists working in the industry
and you ask them, you find out how they do
their job, it really is all about nature and
all about finding things that are positive
in nature and finding out how we can benefit
from them.
And then rather than tearing down the rainforests
to get every single, every single molecule
that we need, how can we mass produce it?
How can we synthesize it? How can we produce
it in volume? So, I don't hold to the all-natural
fallacies at all. I mean, you've all heard
the argument, what are some other all-natural
compounds?
Hemlock, box jellyfish neurotoxin, poison
oak. I mean, the list goes on and on and on.
Mercury. How many things in nature are bad
for us? A lot. You have questions. Was that
a scratch of the head?
>>Male Audience Member #15: I'm scratching.
>>Brian Dunning: Yes, the question was yes
it was a scratch on the head. How are we on
time? Are we done? Yeah, we're close. We have
seven minutes. Yes, go ahead.
>>Male Audience Member #16: When you were
talking about concentrations of things in
your body. Do you have any particular [ ]?
>>Brian Dunning: Homeopathy.
[laughter]
Any remarks about homeopathy?
I'll repeat the Twitter we just said today.
The ocean is now--what was it? The ocean is
now a homeopathic cure for terrorism.
[laughter]
Love that. Homeopathy is, homeopathy is one
of those things that it's so stupid that you
can't believe it's actually a problem. But
if you go into a drug store now, you'll start
to see homeopathic compounds everywhere. It
is really, really growing because these companies
have discovered we can sell no product at
all for just as much money as we were selling
product before. [pause]
It's based on the concept of dilution. Although,
that's not really accurate because there is
none of the compound, none of the original
compound in it at all. If there is any, it
is not homeopathy by definition, if you understand
what homeopathy actually is. A typical dilution
is 30C. Thirty and then Roman numeral C. That's
one hundred to the 30th power-- one followed
by 60 zeroes.
That's equivalent to one atom in a sphere
of water the size of the Earth's orbit.
[laughter]
And you take one tiny little bit of that,
put it in a sugar pill and how likely is it
that there's going to be any of that original
compound? It's impossible. It's well beyond
what we consider to be chemically pure, which
is related to Avogadro's number, six times
ten to the 23rd power. But it doesn't even
stop there. Because a sugar pill is dry.
There is none of the water left in it. None
of the magic water is even in the bottle.
It's sugar pills. It doesn't even contain
the magical water that they say homeopathy
is all about. So it's one fallacy compounded
on top of another fallacy, compounded on top
of another fallacy. It's just stupid. And
if you look at the labeling on a homeopathic
product, next time you're in a drug store,
find one and check it out. And under active
ingredients, it'll say it's got herb of root,
or whatever the hell it is. Can I say hell?
[laughter]
And it'll list that under "active ingredients."
So you might argue with me, how can you say
there's none of it in here? It's listed under
the ingredients. But you'll notice that the
concentration is listed as a homeopathic dilution,
which means by definition, there is nothing
in there.
And it'll say inactive ingredients. And that's
where we get the sucrose and lactose, is what
the sugar pills are made of. That's all that
they are. So homeopathy is, as stupid as it
is, it's becoming a real problem because [pause]
drug companies--most supplement companies--are
owned by the major drug companies because
they're so much more profitable.
They're just starting to sell--. Zycam was
one of the first. Zycam used to sell a regular
cold remedy, containing conventional cold
remedy stuff in it. And then they came out
with another product, which in very small
letters said "homeopathic" on it. Sold for
exactly the same price. They no longer make
the original product at all anymore.
They're literally selling no product at all
for just as much money. And people are happy
to buy it, simply because they don't understand
that. Yes, sir.
>>Male Audience Member #17: You're talking
about the placebo effect, right?
>>Brian Dunning: The placebo effect – yeah,
the placebo effect is often what people describe
homeopathy as. I'm not convinced that it is
the placebo effect so much as it is confirmation
bias. And confirmation bias is when you notice
things that confirm your existing beliefs
and you ignore, or just skip over or your
brain just dismisses things that don't agree
with your pre-existing beliefs.
And for years, I took Vitamin C whenever I
got sick. Now, you can search the medical
literature all day long and you'll find nothing
but studies determining that Vitamin C does
nothing for a cold. It does not reduce the
severity. It does not prevent it. And yet,
we all take Vitamin C whenever we get sick
or to prevent ourselves from getting sick.
And I was taking it as recently as a couple
of years ago, even after I'd done episodes
about vitamin mega dosing and all that stuff.
And I knew what the medical science was. And
I still kept taking it just because I'd been
doing it my whole life. And it was so hard
for me to let go of that. But confirmation
bias is why I kept taking it. I'd get sick.
I'd take a whole bunch of Vitamin C. And guess
what would happen?
[laughter]
I'd get better.
That Vitamin C must have worked. That's not
an example of the placebo effect so much as
it is confirmation bias. Because I came away
from that with a conscious perception that
the Vitamin C had cured my cold.
So, I didn't notice the times when I took
Vitamin C. I didn't notice those first few
days of taking it where I didn't get better
yet. I noticed the last day I took it. Wow,
that Vitamin C really knocked out that cold.
So, could be a combination of either. Not
sure. Yes.
>>Female Audience Member #18: So then where's
the happy medium? 'Cause I don't wanna buy
something that's just full of chemicals. I
want something natural.
>>Brian Dunning: Where's the happy medium
if you don't wanna buy something that's full
of chemicals and you want something that's
natural? What's the difference? What's not
made of chemicals? Can you think of anything
that's not made of chemicals? Every chemical
has a scary sounding name. No matter what
it is, the most beautiful blade of grass you'll
find out here--. What's that?
>>Male Audience Member #19: Dihydrogen monoxide.
>>Brian Dunning: Dihydrogen monoxide, exactly.
The perfect example. I think probably everyone
here has seen these things on TV where they'll
go out to some hippie rally some place--pardon
anyone who that offends--you, sir.
[laughter]
And they'll have a--what do you call it when
you're signing your name? A petition, thank
you. To ban dihydrogen monoxide. And people
go, "Oh, hell. I'll sign that. I don't even
need to know what it is." And they've got
all sorts of great sales pitches that they
can tell you about the evil dihydrogen monoxide.
It promoted excess urination.
[laughter]
It's found throughout our environment. It's
in all of our food. It's in all of the water
that we drink.
[laughter]
>>Male Audience Member #20: A major component
of acid rain.
>>Brian Dunning: A major component of acid
rain, exactly. These are the things that it's
easy to sell that sounds so scary and it sounds
so plausible. What's that?
>>Male Audience Member #21: It causes tsunamis.
>>Brian Dunning: It causes tsunamis. It's
true.
[laughter]
But it does homeopathically cure terrorism.
[laughter] So it does have one thing going
for it. So when you say where do you find
the happy medium, there's all sorts of reasons
not to buy products that have nothing to do
with science.
For example, being a vegetarian. I might choose
not to eat meat because I don't like to kill
animals. That's perfectly valid. That's an
ideology. That's absolutely valid. You don't
have to have science proving that it's healthy
to not eat meat. You can do it if you want
to. So I say the same thing. If you wanna
buy--.
If you don't wanna go to the doctor when you
get sick, fine. You're probably not gonna
die. The human body has an amazing capacity
for self-healing. It's one of the most amazing
things that has ever existed in all of science,
is the capacity of the human body for self-healing.
In fact, every drug that we produce, every
surgical procedure, it does not heal us.
It creates optimal conditions for our body
to heal itself. So, you're really not too
likely to die from any given disease. Until
a hundred years ago, there was really no such
thing as medical science. We had what we thought
was medical science, but it did more harm
than good as often as not.
So I have no problem with people who wanna
take an ideological or a philosophical perspective
of "I don't wanna go to McDonalds because
I don't like the company." "I don't wanna
eat meat." "I don't wanna buy Big Pharma drugs."
That's fine. Where it's not fine is when you
look for scientific facts, when you try to
cherry-pick what's out there.
When you try to search the internet and find
information that supports that view and convince
yourself that it's based on good science.
Because it's not. There's a difference between
science and ideology. Science is facts and
figures. You're either right or you're wrong.
Ideology, it's fair to be wherever you wanna
be on the spectrum.
So, just keep in mind what's science and what's
not. [pause] That's kind of a good sound bite
to end on.
[laughter]
Anything else? Not a single question from
above. I'm disappointed in the people from
above. Where's the camera? Can they see me?
Are they here or are they there? They're there.
What's wrong with you people? Let's go. I
came all the way to your town to do this.
[laugher]
OK. I'm sorry. Go ahead.
>>Male Audience Member #21: Yeah, so what
goes into making an episode?
>>Brian Dunning: What goes into making an
episode? Boy. [laughs] A lot of hard work.
I do an episode every week. It's ten to twelve
minutes. There's 1700 and 50 words written.
I spend about a week researching and writing
each one, simply because they come out every
week.
I'm usually working on two to four of them
at a time. So, I'll just have several in my
folder and I'll work on whichever one is – kind
of grabs my interest the most, so I'm most
motivated whenever I'm sitting down. And I
just do a lot of--. I start all of my research
on the internet because that's the easiest
way. Most of the time, I can get everything
I need.
I have subscriptions to virtually every scientific
journal so I can look up anything most of
the time without having to go to a library
in person, 'cause I simply don't have the
time to do that. I also rely on--. Great sources
are these archives of newspaper articles.
There's two in particular that I use that
have billions of newspaper articles, so they
say--I haven't counted them personally--in
every language from hundreds of years. And
when you're going over something that happened
in the 1600s, you can find a newspaper article
about it. It's really something. Actually,
that's not true.
They didn't have printing back then. So I'm
lying. You should’ve caught me on that.
[laughter]
But 200 years ago, you can find newspaper
articles about it. And that's amazing, going
back to the original sources. I also have
a list of a Google group. Thank you very much.
About 500 people on it now that are scientists
in virtually every discipline.
And whenever I have a question that I simply
can't find the answer to, I will send a question
out to this list. I don't use it as often
as I wish, because I'm usually out of time.
I don't have time to wait for answers. But
whenever I do get them, I get great ones.
And sometimes, I'll take an entire episode.
If it's about a medical subject, for example,
I'm not a doctor but I'll write the whole
thing first and I'll post the entire transcript
up there and there's probably 200 of these
people are doctors. And enough of them will
read it and give me feedback. And I'll always
end up making changes and fixes. So, that's
the process.
It's just a lot of hard work and a lot of
research. My educational background--. I went
to college for computer science back in the
80s, but I never did anything with it professionally.
And I also went to UCLA and USC for writing
for film and television. And that's not a
job. So--.
[laughter]
I had a job that I didn't take and spent my
time on something that wasn't a job. So it
wasn't until podcasting came out, about five
years ago, five, six years ago, that here's
suddenly a perfect confluence of doing all--.
I do all the back end programming on the website
and the podcast by myself. So it combined
all my interests--general science, computer
science, writing for film and television,
doing the research. Like many people, as a
kid I had just a great passion for the paranormal.
I was reading every book on UFOs and Bigfoots
and believing every word of it.
So I always had a great interest in that stuff.
And so, that's where the subject matter came
from. But doing the podcasts is just the,
it's the perfect job for me. It's doing everything
that I love. And it's something that I was
doing as a hobby for the first few years.
And by the end of this year, I plan to be
doing it full time, which is a heck of an
accomplishment for a completely independent
podcaster.
Most of the show's income is donations from
listeners. And then there's also advertising
on the website. I've got great placement in
certain search engines.
[laughter]
Just because I've done 258 episodes. All of
them are about 1750 words of very good quality.
It's all original content. It's very--. I
don't know if "keyword density" means anything
anymore. I'm sure you guys know more about
that than I do.
At least I hope so. But they're all really
good relevant articles. And so, if you search
for 2012 Apocalypse, for example, I come up
on Page One. That's a hell of an accomplishment--can
I say hell?--right there.
[laughter]
Because that's a term that there's a lot of
competition for. So, I have advertising on
the site that I'm not doing a very good job
of. Anyone feel free to contact me if you
work in the AdSense department. Tell me what
the hell I'm doing wrong. Can I say hell?
God, I say that a lot.
[laughter]
I said "God." I am horrible.
Who's in charge of this? Don't you screen
these people?
[laughter]
Oh, you are.
>>Male From Above: Excuse me.
>>Brian Dunning: There we go.
>>Male From Above: I have a question.
>>Brian Dunning: I hope you have a question
and you're not someone telling us you need
the room now.
[laughter]
Go ahead.
>>Male From Above: I do have a question. So,
you talk about myths and misinformation or
bad science in pop culture, what about aren't
there any bright spots or positive things?
In particular, do you see some positive trend
or science-friendly, science-positive message
in some say, TV shows or anything like that?
>>Brian Dunning: Do you need me to repeat
the questions for the video? Or do you have
those? You have those, OK. Do I see any positive
trends? No. Well, I mean there are some. But
overall, I think we have a negative trend.
The realm of rationality and reason, I think,
is gonna continue to slide. And the reason,
I think, we're going to continue to lose ground
as far as capturing hearts and minds of the
general public is because of the internet
and television. It's become so easy to reach
so many people with a sensational message.
People don't have time to listen to ten things
a day. They have time to listen to one thing
a day and it's whatever is easiest. It's the
front page of CNN, or it's the first five
minutes of Oprah. That's where people get
their science information. And people want
sensational information. They don't care if
information is true.
They probably care, but they don't know whether
information is true or not. They're attracted
to sensational information. You may or may
not be aware that about two years ago, CNN
fired its entire science department. CNN no
longer has a science bureau.
They replaced it with something they called
the "Empowered Patient Bureau," which is basically
alternative medicine--medicine that either,
by definition, has been proven not to work,
or not proven to work. That's what the empowered
patient is, because that's sensational information.
It's easy to say, "Hey, we have a cure for
cancer."
Or, "Here's a new diet that you can try that's
gonna make you miraculously healthy." That's
the information that people want and that
they're attracted to. They're not attracted
to the dry facts of what's going on. So I
think we're gonna continue to lose ground
for that reason. However, I don't mean to
sound gloomy and doomy about that, 'cause
I see it as a huge opportunity.
[voice in background talking on cell phone]
Running around, talking on our cell phone,
making noise.
[laughter]
Ha. I can interrupt your phone call, too.
Ha ha ha ha. What was going on? Something
burning down?
>>Male Audience Member #22: We can't talk
about it.
>>Brian Dunning: Oh, OK.
[laughter]
Any other questions from above?
[pause]
Oooooh.
[laughter]
>>Male Presenter: I guess not.
>>Brian Dunning: I guess not. Yes, sir.
>>Male Audience Member #23: So you interrupted
in saying [ ]
>>Brian Dunning: Thank you. You're saying
that I interrupted myself. I interrupted myself,
thank you, by saying that it's a great opportunity
that we have because we do. You see, it's--.
[pause] How many people here have listened
to my show?
OK. Enough of you. And would most of you agree
that at least some of them are really interesting
and contain information that you haven't heard
before? OK. And it's a lot of work. The best
ones are the ones that took the most work.
To make fact interesting is a lot harder than
to just make up something sensational.
And that's why Oprah, et cetera, et cetera,
et cetera -- they just do something sensational.
Because that's what gets eyeball share. There's
no need to go to the extra work. There's no
upside in doing all the extra work to make
fact sensational. It's just a lot of extra
work. So, I work really hard at it. And I
think I'm reasonably successful, at least.
And I hope I become more successful at it.
And I hope other people do the same example.
Every TV show that's out there, every Ghost
Hunter TV show, if they put in five times
as much work, their show could present nothing
but great information and still be just as
fascinating. But it would take that much more
work.
So, if you're proud of what it is that you
do for a living, if you care about whether
you're actually providing a service or whether
you're just providing entertainment, and I
think a lot of people do--I think most people
do-- then it's very personally fulfilling
to put in that extra work and to be proud
of what you're doing.
That's the way I feel about it. And I do a
lot of this talking heads stuff, where I'll
be a little guest expert on some documentary
or something like that. And the TV crews that
I've worked with, almost to the last person,
they all feel the same way. They have no background
in science, or communicating science. They
don't know any better than the shows that
they're making whether the information is
true or not.
They think it is. They assume it is. They
like making it sensational. And they really
appreciate good information, but they simply
don't have the background to tell what's true,
what's fiction from what's nonsense, from
what's real. But they do have the interest.
And I think most people can be brought around
to better science education, better appreciation
for what's real.
I think most people who are in the media can
be brought around to doing the extra work,
because it is more fulfilling, I think. If
that makes any sense.
[pause]
[applause]
Applause, thank you.